<pre>
  BIP: ?
  Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
  Title: P2MR SLH-DSA Leaf
  Authors: Vikram Rastogi <vikramrastogi@gmail.com>
  Status: Draft
  Type: Specification
  Assigned: ?
  License: BSD-3-Clause
  Version: 0.9.0
  Requires: 341, 342, 360
</pre>

==Introduction==

===Abstract===

This document specifies a single new Pay-to-Merkle-Root (P2MR) leaf version that verifies one stateless, hash-based post-quantum signature. The new QRS leaf is valid only inside BIP-360 P2MR outputs and commits to exactly one 32-byte SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s public key. Spending it reveals the public key, a BIP-360 control block, and one SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s signature over a BIP-341-style transaction digest.

This BIP is purely additive. It does not restrict, freeze, burn, throttle, sunset, or otherwise encumber any existing output type, and it does not modify the validation of ECDSA, Schnorr, P2PK, P2PKH, P2SH, P2WPKH, P2WSH, or P2TR. It defines exactly one new, opt-in, post-quantum spending condition for new P2MR outputs, and nothing else.

'''This BIP gives users a quantum-rescue spend path. It does not decide the fate of unmigrated coins.'''

===Copyright===

This document is licensed under the 3-clause BSD license.

===Motivation===

BIP-360 defines P2MR, a script-tree output that removes Taproot's key-path spend and therefore avoids long-term on-chain exposure of an elliptic-curve public key. BIP-360 explicitly does not provide post-quantum signatures, and so does not by itself defend against an attacker who can derive an elliptic-curve private key during the brief unconfirmed-transaction (short-exposure) window. BIP-361 proposes a migration-and-sunset process but its header requires a "TBD Post Quantum Signature BIP" — a destination scheme that does not yet exist as a specification.

This BIP fills exactly that gap, and only that gap: a concrete, opt-in, post-quantum spend condition that can be committed inside a P2MR tree and revealed only if needed. A holder who wants a conservative fail-safe creates a P2MR output with an ordinary efficient spend leaf (today's classical signature) and a QRS leaf alongside it. While classical signatures remain safe, the efficient leaf is used and the QRS public key stays hidden. If the classical algorithm later becomes unsafe, the holder spends through the QRS leaf to migrate the coins.

More precisely, the QRS leaf is a quantum-rescue ''spend path'': it lets an owner move funds out of a P2MR output without ever exposing an elliptic-curve public key, migrating them to a fresh quantum-resistant output. In the special case of a P2MR output committing to a QRS leaf ''alone'' (no classical sibling), it is also a quantum-safe ''destination'' in its own right — funds at rest are committed only as a Merkle root and can be moved only under an SLH-DSA signature — making it suitable for native post-quantum custody, not solely for rescue.

The design deliberately makes no decision about legacy-output policy. Whether already-exposed coins should be frozen, burned, throttled, rescued, or left untouched is a separate social-consensus question (the subject of BIP-361 and related proposals), and bundling it with an optional signing primitive is precisely what has prevented a minimal post-quantum signing change from converging.

==Design goals==

# Define one narrow consensus primitive, not a migration framework.
# Depend on BIP-360 and reuse its Merkle-tree structure and control block.
# Introduce no new address family beyond P2MR.
# Use exactly one stateless, hash-based signature scheme.
# Introduce no new lattice assumption in Bitcoin's first post-quantum consensus path.
# Give large signatures no special block-weight discount.
# Propose a concrete resource-accounting rule, and require native benchmark evidence before activation; if the evidence fails, add an explicit per-QRS validation budget before deployment.
# Change the validity of no existing output type or signature.
# Leave additional algorithms, wallet standards, and migration policy to later BIPs.

==Specification==

===Constants===

<source>
QRS_LEAF_VERSION = TBD_EVEN_LEAF_VERSION   # provisional; 0xc2 used in examples only
QRS_CONTROL_BYTE = QRS_LEAF_VERSION | 0x01 # P2MR requires the low bit of c[0] to be set
QRS_EXT_FLAG     = 2                        # domain separation from key-path (0) and BIP-342 tapscript (1)
QRS_HASH_TYPE    = 0x00                     # SIGHASH_DEFAULT (the only mode defined here)
</source>

The value <code>0xc2</code> appears in examples only. The final even leaf version MUST be assigned after review for conflicts with other proposed or active leaf-version soft forks; BIP-341 constrains leaf versions to even values, with the control byte's low bit reserved (forced to 1 in P2MR per BIP-360; in Taproot this bit instead encodes key parity), and recommends they be shared across witness versions. The signature algorithm is SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s as specified by FIPS 205. The public key is 32 bytes; the signature is exactly 7,856 bytes.

===QRS leaf and Merkle commitment===

A QRS leaf is a BIP-360 P2MR leaf whose leaf version is <code>QRS_LEAF_VERSION</code> and whose leaf payload is exactly one 32-byte SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s public key. Unlike a tapscript leaf, a QRS leaf is not a script: its leaf version fixes its semantics to "verify one SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s signature." The leaf hash is:

<source>
leaf_hash = tagged_hash("TapLeaf", bytes([QRS_LEAF_VERSION]) || compact_size(32) || qrs_public_key)
</source>

The P2MR Merkle root is computed from this leaf hash and any sibling leaf hashes exactly as specified by BIP-360.

===Activation dependency===

This BIP has no effect unless BIP-360 is active. Its rules MUST NOT become active before the corresponding BIP-360 rules are active; deployment MAY be simultaneous with BIP-360. Before activation, a QRS leaf is an unrecognised future leaf version, is not validated, and is therefore unsafe to reveal; wallets MUST NOT treat a QRS leaf as enforceable until this BIP is active.

Because BIP-360 is still draft, the final version of this BIP MUST be checked against the final BIP-360 definitions for leaf hashing, branch hashing, sighash tagging, annex handling, and future-leaf behavior. If final BIP-360 uses P2MR-specific tagged hashes or changes the P2MR sighash construction, this BIP MUST adopt those final P2MR definitions rather than assuming Taproot tag reuse. The assignment of <code>QRS_EXT_FLAG = 2</code> is also provisional pending conflict review with any other <code>SigMsg</code>-extending proposals.

===Witness structure===

When spending a P2MR output through a QRS leaf, the witness stack MUST be:

<source>
qrs_signature        # exactly 7856 bytes
qrs_public_key       # exactly 32 bytes
control_block        # 1 + 32*m bytes, m in [0,128]
[annex]              # optional, BIP-341/360 annex rules
</source>

The annex, if present, follows BIP-341/BIP-360 annex rules. After removing the annex, exactly three witness elements MUST remain. Validation requires:

# <code>qrs_signature</code> length is exactly 7,856 bytes;
# <code>qrs_public_key</code> length is exactly 32 bytes;
# <code>control_block</code> length is <code>1 + 32*m</code> for integer <code>m</code> in [0,128];
# <code>control_block[0] & 0xfe == QRS_LEAF_VERSION</code>;
# <code>control_block[0] & 1 == 1</code>.

Because <code>qrs_signature</code> and <code>qrs_public_key</code> are validated as witness elements under leaf-version rules rather than pushed onto the script stack, the tapscript 520-byte stack-element limit (retained by BIP-342) does not apply to them. The P2MR Merkle root is recomputed from <code>leaf_hash</code> and the Merkle path in <code>control_block</code>; validation fails unless the recomputed root equals the 32-byte witness program of the spent output.

This witness maps onto the generic BIP-360 P2MR witness layout (initial stack elements, leaf script, control block, optional annex) as follows: the BIP-360 ''leaf script'' position is occupied by <code>qrs_public_key</code>, which is '''not executed as script''' but is interpreted as the 32-byte payload of the QRS leaf version. The single preceding element, <code>qrs_signature</code>, occupies the initial-stack position in the generic layout and is interpreted by QRS validation as the sole signature input. QRS validation does not execute script and does not interpret any other initial stack elements; after annex removal, any witness with more or fewer than these three elements fails.

===Signature message===

Only <code>SIGHASH_DEFAULT</code> is defined. The transaction message uses the BIP-341 <code>SigMsg(hash_type, ext_flag)</code> function with <code>hash_type = QRS_HASH_TYPE</code> and <code>ext_flag = QRS_EXT_FLAG</code>, and the QRS extension <code>qrs_ext = leaf_hash</code>. The 32-byte message passed to SLH-DSA verification is:

<source>
qrs_msg = tagged_hash("TapSighash", bytes([0x00]) || SigMsg(QRS_HASH_TYPE, QRS_EXT_FLAG) || leaf_hash)
</source>

The leading <code>0x00</code> is the BIP-341 sighash epoch. <code>QRS_EXT_FLAG = 2</code> domain-separates QRS signatures from key-path and BIP-342 tapscript signatures; binding <code>leaf_hash</code> binds the signature to this exact leaf and public key, preventing cross-leaf and key-substitution malleability. Concretely, <code>ext_flag = 2</code> means that exactly one 32-byte extension field, <code>leaf_hash</code>, is appended to <code>SigMsg</code> before the <code>TapSighash</code> tagged hash is computed.

===Signature verification===

Validation succeeds if and only if all structural checks above pass and:

<source>
SLH_DSA_SHA2_128s_Verify(qrs_public_key, qrs_msg, qrs_signature) == valid
</source>

using the FIPS 205 SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s verification algorithm (<code>slh_verify</code>) in '''pure mode''' — not the HashSLH-DSA pre-hash variant — with an '''empty context string''' (a <code>ctx</code> of zero length) and <code>qrs_msg</code> supplied as the complete message. The verifier MUST accept only 32-byte public keys and 7,856-byte signatures for the SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s parameter set. No sighash flag byte is appended to <code>qrs_signature</code>; any witness that appends one has length other than 7,856 bytes and fails.

===Resource accounting===

QRS spends receive no special weight discount. The signature, public key, control block, and annex all contribute to transaction weight under existing BIP-141 rules.

This draft proposes that QRS validation require no additional consensus validation budget beyond existing SegWit weight accounting. That proposed rule is not activation-ready until confirmed by native, reproducible validation-cost benchmarks. If those benchmarks show that weight alone is not an adequate bound for QRS verification cost, this BIP MUST be amended before deployment to add an explicit per-QRS validation budget.

The preliminary benchmark does not establish a comfortable safety margin: wrapper overhead likely lowers the measured SLH-DSA/Schnorr ratio, and batch Schnorr verification may lower the effective Schnorr baseline. The no-new-budget rule is therefore a hypothesis to test, not a conclusion of this draft.

The rationale for first evaluating the no-new-budget rule is concrete and reviewable:

# A single SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s signature is 7,856 bytes and contributes ≈ 7,856 weight units of witness data per QRS spend.
# Under the BIP-342 validation-cost model, signature operations are bounded by a budget of 50 weight units of witness per signature operation. A QRS signature's witness weight therefore corresponds to ≈ 157 signature-operation budget units (7,856 / 50). The BIP-342 sigops calculation is used here only as a comparative cost model; QRS validation is not a tapscript signature opcode and does not consume the BIP-342 sigops budget.
# Because every QRS spend carries its own ≈ 7,856-weight signature, a 4,000,000-weight block can contain at most ⌊4,000,000 / 7,856⌋ ≈ 509 QRS verifications even if verification were free — and fewer in practice once non-witness input/output bytes are counted at 4 WU/byte.
# The binding test is per-block validation ''time'', not per-signature cost. Because a QRS spend's total weight (≈ 8,059 WU per input, including non-witness overhead) is ≈ 35× a Schnorr P2TR key-path input's (≈ 230 WU), a maximum-weight block holds ≈ 35× fewer QRS spends. A QRS-saturated block therefore costs more to validate than a Schnorr-saturated block only if one SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s verification exceeds ≈ 35 Schnorr verifications in CPU time, before accounting for batching or implementation-specific effects.

'''Non-consensus preliminary benchmark.''' A non-consensus Python-wrapper benchmark — using PQClean SPHINCS+-SHA2-128s-simple as a preliminary proxy for SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s (the proxy shares the FIPS 205 parameter set's 32-byte public key and 7,856-byte signature) and libsecp256k1 BIP-340 verification on the same machine (Intel Xeon @ 2.8 GHz) — measured a median ≈ 814 µs per SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s verification versus ≈ 37 µs per individual Schnorr verification, a median ratio of ≈ 22×. That result makes the no-new-budget rule plausible enough to test, but it does not establish the rule for consensus. (For reference, ML-DSA-44 verification measured ≈ 3× individual Schnorr, relevant to the future compact-signature opcode in Future Work.)

Two caveats bound this result. First, it is a Python-wrapper benchmark: wrapper overhead is a fixed per-call cost that weighs relatively more on the fast Schnorr operation than the slow SLH-DSA operation, so it likely lowers the measured SLH-DSA/Schnorr ratio — a native benchmark would likely show a somewhat higher ratio. Second, it uses a SPHINCS+ proxy, not a FIPS 205 verifier.

Before this BIP advances beyond Draft, a reference implementation MUST provide native benchmarks using a FIPS 205 SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s verifier, not a SPHINCS+ proxy or Python wrapper. The benchmark suite MUST include valid QRS spends, invalid fixed-length QRS signatures, tail latency, implementation variance, Bitcoin Core validation-path integration, and comparison against both individual Schnorr verification and any batch-verification baseline reviewers consider relevant. Results MUST identify hardware, operating system, compiler, compiler flags, verifier library commits, libsecp256k1 commit, and benchmark harness commit.

If those benchmarks fail to show that existing weight accounting adequately bounds QRS validation cost, this BIP MUST add an explicit per-QRS consensus validation budget before activation.

===Reviewer objections addressed===

This Draft-stage proposal deliberately tracks the main expected objections as explicit design constraints, tests, benchmarks, caveats, or non-goals:

# '''520-byte tapscript limit.''' SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s signatures are 7,856 bytes and cannot fit within BIP-342's retained 520-byte tapscript stack-element limit. This BIP therefore uses a future P2MR leaf version with bespoke witness-element semantics instead of a tapscript opcode.
# '''BIP-360 draft dependency.''' This BIP requires BIP-360 and MUST be rechecked against BIP-360's final leaf hashing, branch hashing, sighash tagging, annex handling, and future-leaf behavior before activation.
# '''<code>ext_flag</code> conflict review.''' <code>QRS_EXT_FLAG = 2</code> is provisional and MUST be checked against other <code>SigMsg</code>-extension proposals before assignment.
# '''Batch Schnorr baseline.''' Batch Schnorr may tighten or invert the validation-cost comparison. The no-new-budget rule is a hypothesis to test, and benchmark evidence MUST distinguish individual Schnorr, reviewed-public batch Schnorr if available, and any experimental batch baseline.
# '''Invalid fixed-length signatures.''' Invalid QRS signatures that have the correct 7,856-byte length MUST be measured separately from cheap structural rejects, because they reach the SLH-DSA verifier.
# '''SUF-CMA malleability.''' QRS witness malleability is addressed by fixed-length public-key/signature encodings, deterministic verification, and the strong unforgeability property expected of SLH-DSA; there is no ECDSA-style low-S rule to add.
# '''No legacy-output policy.''' Legacy freeze, burn, throttle, sunset, rescue, and migration mandates are out of scope. This BIP defines one opt-in P2MR future leaf and no rule for existing output types.

===Standardness policy (non-consensus)===

Nodes SHOULD treat a QRS spend as standard only after this BIP is active and only if: the spent output is a BIP-360 P2MR output; the witness shape exactly matches this specification; existing standard weight and fee rules are satisfied; no more than one QRS signature is verified per input; and the transaction pays fees for the full witness weight. Wallets SHOULD use QRS leaves as emergency/migration leaves, not as the routine happy path while efficient classical signatures remain safe.

==Recommended wallet construction==

A conservative two-leaf P2MR output contains:

# an ordinary efficient leaf for current use (e.g. a BIP-342 Schnorr <code>OP_CHECKSIG</code> leaf); and
# a QRS leaf committing to a fresh SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s public key.

Only the Merkle root appears on-chain; both public keys stay hidden until their leaf is used. The two leaves are independent spending alternatives (a logical OR): the holder spends the efficient leaf while classical signatures are safe, and the QRS leaf only as a rescue. Critically, the QRS leaf does '''not''' protect an output whose sibling leaf has already become spendable by an attacker — in a P2MR tree, any one valid leaf is sufficient to spend the output. The rescue model therefore assumes the ordinary efficient leaf remains hidden and uncompromised until the owner migrates: if the efficient leaf's script, public key, descriptor- or xpub-derived key material, or prior spend history has exposed a discrete-log-vulnerable public key, the owner should treat the output as vulnerable and migrate through the QRS leaf '''before''' an attacker can spend through the weaker sibling. The QRS spend ''path'' remains exclusively the holder's; the ''coin'' does not, once the sibling key is exposed.

Wallets SHOULD generate a fresh QRS key per output, SHOULD NOT derive QRS keys by reusing an ECDSA or BIP-340 private key, SHOULD use domain-separated derivation from seed material, and SHOULD make QRS backup requirements explicit to users. Descriptor, PSBT, derivation-path, hardware-signer, and watch-only standards are out of scope and SHOULD be specified separately.

==Rationale==

===Why a P2MR leaf rather than a new witness version?===

A leaf reuses the BIP-360 output type and lets a wallet combine the QRS condition with other leaves in one Merkle tree. A dedicated witness version for one post-quantum key type would create another address family and would not naturally support script trees.

===Why a leaf version rather than a tapscript opcode (in v1)?===

SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s signatures (7,856 bytes) far exceed the 520-byte tapscript stack-element limit that BIP-342 retains. A leaf version validates large witness elements directly under bespoke rules without changing general tapscript execution or stack limits, which keeps the first post-quantum primitive narrow: one leaf type, one key, one signature, one sighash mode. (A composable opcode is the right v2 tool; see Future Work.)

===Why restrict to P2MR outputs?===

P2MR is the only key-path-free output. Permitting a post-quantum rescue leaf inside an output that still carries an exposed key path (e.g. P2TR) would offer false comfort, since the output would remain quantum-vulnerable through that key path. Confining the QRS leaf to P2MR ensures the capability appears only where it actually delivers protection, and the leaf version enforces this naturally.

===Why SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s, and only one algorithm?===

SLH-DSA is stateless and hash-based; its security rests on assumptions Bitcoin already relies on through SHA-256, rather than on a lattice assumption introduced as Bitcoin's first post-quantum consensus verifier. The SHA2-128s parameter set keeps the public key at 32 bytes and the signature at 7,856 bytes. Large signatures are acceptable for a rescue path that is rarely used, by design. Limiting v1 to a single algorithm minimises review burden, implementation risk, test-vector surface, and future deprecation politics; multiple algorithms would make activation hostage to an algorithm-selection debate. More compact schemes (ML-DSA, FN-DSA) may be proposed later, after independent cryptographic, implementation, wallet, and resource-cost review.

===Why only SIGHASH_DEFAULT?===

The purpose is emergency migration. One sighash mode minimises consensus surface, test vectors, hardware-signer complexity, and cross-protocol signature confusion. Additional modes can be added by a later BIP if needed.

===Why no witness discount?===

A post-quantum signing BIP should not also be a blockspace-policy BIP. Large signatures must pay for their actual witness size; a discount would create a cheap data-carriage path and reopen unrelated block-weight debates.

===Why no legacy-output policy?===

Restricting legacy ECDSA/Schnorr spends, freezing exposed keys, burning unmigrated coins, or throttling P2PK are separate social and technical questions requiring a different BIP and a different consensus process. This BIP intentionally provides a destination for voluntary migration before the network is asked to decide what, if anything, should happen to unmigrated outputs. That separation is the entire point: the moment a quantum signing BIP begins adjudicating already-exposed coins, it stops being a cryptography proposal and becomes a contested redistribution question.

==Backward compatibility==

This proposal is a soft fork. Before activation, upgraded BIP-360 implementations that do not implement this BIP apply BIP-360's rules for unrecognized future leaf versions; after activation, upgraded nodes enforce the QRS rules above for QRS leaves. Like other soft forks using reserved future semantics, this proposal is additive at the output-type level but restrictive for the assigned QRS future leaf version after activation: spends through that leaf must satisfy the new QRS validation rules. A witness that was valid before activation but fails the QRS checks becomes invalid after activation only if it attempts to spend through a QRS leaf. Existing UTXOs, output types, and legacy-signature validation are unchanged.

==Security considerations==

A QRS leaf protects only coins whose P2MR output commits to it and whose QRS private key remains available to the owner. In a two-leaf output, privacy and safety depend on operational behavior: if the ordinary elliptic-curve public key is leaked through address reuse, xpub or descriptor sharing, multisig coordination, watch-only infrastructure, or a prior spend, the efficient leaf may become exposed to long-exposure quantum key recovery, in which case the owner should migrate via the QRS leaf rather than broadcasting an elliptic-curve signature.

This BIP does not protect already-exposed P2PK, P2MS, reused P2PKH/P2WPKH, P2TR key-path, or other legacy outputs, and does not solve lost-key recovery. Consensus implementations MUST use a deterministic, memory-safe, constant-time-where-applicable, consensus-reviewed SLH-DSA verifier, and SHOULD test at least two independent implementations against the same vectors before deployment.

Witness malleability: because the QRS public key and signature are fixed-length octet strings (32 and 7,856 bytes) and SLH-DSA verification is deterministic, there is no canonical/non-canonical encoding distinction to enforce and no ECDSA-style low-S rule is required. A third party cannot derive an alternative valid signature for the same message and public key without violating the strong unforgeability property expected of SLH-DSA; this is the post-quantum analogue of the SUF-CMA non-malleability rationale used for BIP-340 Schnorr signatures. The fixed-length requirement together with verification is the complete syntactic validity condition for a QRS witness.

==Activation==

Activation parameters are intentionally not specified in this draft; they should be proposed only after BIP-360 review, QRS implementation review, test-vector review, and wallet-prototype review. Because this BIP is additive and restricts no legacy output, it is designed to avoid the primary sources of contention in forced-migration proposals; this is a claim about scope, not a prediction that any particular activation mechanism (e.g. version-bits signalling) will be uncontroversial in practice. This BIP SHOULD NOT be activated in a deployment package that also freezes, burns, restricts, throttles, or sunsets legacy outputs.

==Future work: a composable post-quantum opcode (v2)==

The QRS leaf is deliberately non-composable: it is exactly one public key under one signature and cannot be combined, within a single spending condition, with other script logic such as timelocks (<code>OP_CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY</code>), thresholds, or multisignature. Because P2MR leaves are independent spending alternatives (a logical OR), "a post-quantum signature AND a timelock AND a 2-of-3" cannot be expressed as one required condition under this BIP. Custody constructions — vaults, inheritance schemes, corporate multisig — frequently require exactly such conjunctive conditions, and supporting them requires a post-quantum signature opcode usable inside tapscript (e.g. <code>OP_CHECKSIG_PQ</code>).

That opcode is out of scope here for three reasons: (1) it must resolve the 520-byte tapscript stack-element limit, which both SLH-DSA and ML-DSA signatures exceed; (2) it is most useful with a compact scheme (ML-DSA or FN-DSA), whose selection needs separate review; and (3) bundling agility and composability into the first primitive reintroduces the algorithm-selection and resource-modelling debates this BIP is scoped to avoid.

When that opcode is specified, it SHOULD resolve the stack-element-size limit by a '''narrowly scoped uplift''' — permitting only that opcode's signature and public-key operands to exceed 520 bytes — rather than by canonical witness chunking. Chunking a large signature into ≤520-byte stack elements requires a canonical-form rule over chunk count and sizes plus rejection of all equivalent re-chunkings; getting it wrong makes the witness malleable and destabilises wtxid-dependent workflows such as CPFP. An operand-scoped uplift introduces no such malleability surface and no broad change to general script resource limits.

==Rejected alternatives==

* '''Mandating migration in this BIP.''' Rejected: legacy sunset is a separate social-consensus question and must not block an opt-in rescue primitive.
* '''ML-DSA as the first rescue algorithm.''' Rejected for v1: smaller signatures, but it introduces a lattice assumption as Bitcoin's first post-quantum consensus signature. A separate ML-DSA BIP may follow.
* '''Multiple algorithms at once (an "algorithm buffet").''' Rejected: more review burden and activation held hostage to algorithm-selection disagreement. One conservative fallback first.
* '''A tapscript opcode in v1.''' Rejected: the signature exceeds tapscript stack-element limits without also changing general script resource rules. See Future Work.
* '''Canonical witness chunking to carry the signature.''' Rejected in favour of validating the signature as a single leaf-version witness element (v1) or, in a future opcode, an operand-scoped size uplift — both of which avoid the malleability surface that chunking introduces.
* '''A witness discount for QRS signatures.''' Rejected: the emergency path should pay for its size.

==Test vectors==

A Complete version MUST include vectors for: valid QRS spend without annex; valid QRS spend with annex; invalid fixed-length signature that reaches the SLH-DSA verifier and fails verification; invalid public-key length; invalid signature length; invalid control-block length; control byte with low bit unset; invalid leaf version; Merkle-root mismatch; malformed witness stack; cross-implementation transaction-digest agreement; large-weight consensus-valid (non-standard) cases; and maximum-depth Merkle path.

==Reference implementation==

A reference implementation MUST include: P2MR QRS leaf validation; an audited, pinned SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s verifier; transaction-digest tests; consensus tests; fuzz tests for malformed witnesses and control blocks; worst-case per-block validation benchmarks (per Resource Accounting); a native benchmark harness comparing QRS validation against individual and batch BIP-340 verification baselines, with median, p95, p99, and maximum timings; signet activation parameters; and a wallet demo creating a two-leaf P2MR output with an efficient spend leaf and a QRS leaf.

The current pre-review repository contains the native benchmark harness, provisional executable structured fixtures, draft cryptographic vectors verified through OpenSSL SLH-DSA where available, and negative/fuzz cases for witness-shape failures. These artifacts are review scaffolding for the Draft stage; final consensus vectors remain pending final BIP-360/QRS hashing and transaction-digest definitions.

==Acknowledgements==

The v1 leaf-version design — QRS leaf, P2MR-only scoping, single conservative hash-based algorithm, no discount, and explicit refusal to decide legacy-output policy — follows a draft circulated as "P2MR SLH-DSA Leaf," and builds directly on BIP-360 (Hunter Beast, Ethan Heilman, Isabel Foxen Duke) and the dependency named by BIP-361 (Jameson Lopp, Christian Papathanasiou, Ian Smith, Joe Ross, Steve Vaile, Pierre-Luc Dallaire-Demers), without endorsing any migration policy. The concrete resource-accounting rule, the de-risked activation language, and the composable-opcode roadmap are refinements layered on that design. It relies on the NIST PQC standards, particularly FIPS 205.

==Reference links==

* [[bip-0341.mediawiki|BIP-341: Taproot]]
* [[bip-0342.mediawiki|BIP-342: Validation of Taproot Scripts]]
* [[bip-0360.mediawiki|BIP-360: Pay-to-Merkle-Root (P2MR)]]
* [[bip-0361.mediawiki|BIP-361: Post Quantum Migration and Legacy Signature Sunset]]
* [https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/fips/205/final FIPS 205: Stateless Hash-Based Digital Signature Standard]

==Changelog==

* '''0.9.0''' — Hardened the pre-review package without changing the core design. Added an explicit reviewer-objections subsection; removed unsupported resource-cost conclusion language; required invalid fixed-length signature measurement; separated individual, reviewed-public batch, and experimental batch Schnorr baselines; and kept the no-new-budget rule framed as a hypothesis to test before activation.
* '''0.8.3''' — Pre-review tightening: added BIP-342 as an explicit dependency; foregrounded that wrapper overhead and batch Schnorr may narrow the resource-accounting margin; added a BIP-360-finalization check for leaf hashing, branch hashing, sighash tagging, annex handling, and future-leaf behavior; and sharpened the witness-malleability discussion to use the same strong-unforgeability framing as BIP-340 Schnorr.
* '''0.8.2''' — Tightened the resource-accounting stance: no-new-budget is now framed as a proposed rule contingent on native validation-cost review, with required invalid-signature, tail-latency, Bitcoin Core integration, implementation-variance, and individual/batch Schnorr baselines before activation. Clarified that the soft fork is additive at the output-type level but restrictive for the assigned QRS future leaf version after activation.
* '''0.8.1''' — Consistency fix: aligned the BIP's benchmark caveat with the benchmark harness, so both artifacts describe wrapper overhead as likely lowering the measured SLH-DSA/Schnorr ratio.
* '''0.8.0''' — Abstract slogan tightened from "quantum-rescue destination" to "quantum-rescue spend path".
* '''0.7.0''' — Hardened the benchmark and its citation after review of the harness. Switched the headline figures from minimum to median timing; qualified the result as a Python-wrapper benchmark and noted that wrapper overhead likely lowers the measured SLH-DSA/Schnorr ratio; relabelled the SPHINCS+ implementation a preliminary proxy; and weakened the conclusion to "plausible and worth testing, not established," with the reference-implementation benchmark now required to report median and tail latency against a named library commit. The accompanying harness was updated to match.
* '''0.6.0''' — Final pre-posting edits (pre-review release). Labelled the benchmark non-consensus; softened the SPHINCS+ proxy from "faithful" to "preliminary"; and clarified that the BIP-342 sigops figure is a comparative cost model only, since QRS validation is a leaf-version rule and not a tapscript signature opcode that consumes the BIP-342 budget.
* '''0.5.0''' — Pre-posting polish. Softened backward-compatibility wording to defer to BIP-360's unrecognized-future-leaf-version rules rather than restate their semantics; made the resource-accounting framing dryer ("may already provide an adequate bound" rather than "over-prices"); replaced the "canonical/non-canonical encoding" requirement — undefined for fixed-length SLH-DSA artifacts — with a plain fixed-length acceptance rule, and added a Security Considerations note explaining why no encoding-canonicalization or low-S-style malleability rule is needed for this scheme.
* '''0.4.0''' — Added a preliminary verification benchmark to Resource Accounting. On one machine, SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s verification measured ≈ 22× a libsecp256k1 Schnorr verification. Reframed the binding threshold from the BIP-342 sigop-budget heuristic (≈ 157×) to the stricter per-block weight ratio (≈ 35×). The no-new-budget position remained provisional pending a FIPS 205 verifier on named production hardware.
* '''0.3.0''' — Second review pass. Resolved a witness-semantics contradiction (<code>qrs_signature</code> occupies the initial-stack position; a QRS leaf does have one initial stack element, not zero); corrected control-byte terminology (P2MR forces the low bit of <code>c[0]</code> high as an error-detection measure, not as a Taproot Y-parity bit); and pinned the SLH-DSA verification API to pure mode with an empty context string and canonical FIPS 205 encodings, removing a consensus-determinism ambiguity.
* '''0.2.0''' — Incorporated external review. Corrected the two-leaf sibling-leaf security language (in an OR tree the coin is spendable if the classical sibling is compromised, regardless of QRS-leaf safety); marked the leaf version provisional pending conflict review; made the no-new-budget resource-accounting position explicitly provisional pending benchmark, with a named comparison to libsecp256k1; clarified that <code>qrs_public_key</code> occupies the BIP-360 leaf-script position as a non-script payload; clarified <code>ext_flag = 2</code> semantics; refined the "rescue destination" framing to a "rescue spend path" (noting a QRS-only output is also a native quantum-safe destination); aligned the BIP header with the repository convention.
* '''0.1.0''' — Initial consolidated draft: P2MR-only SLH-DSA-SHA2-128s quantum-rescue leaf, exact witness encoding, concrete (provisional) resource-accounting rule, composable-opcode roadmap deferred to Future Work.
